docs: Document commands to de-register entities #2700 (#2755)
thin-edge/thin-edge.io: docs/src/operate/lifecycle/deregister.md

---
title: Deregister entities
tags: [Lifecycle]
sidebar_position: 1

> description: Deregister entities from thin-edge

Reviewer: Use the thin-edge.io placeholder.

```suggestion
description: Deregister entities from %%te%%
```

---

# Deregister entities

> All the entities registered with thin-edge are stored with the MQTT broker as retained messages,

Reviewer: Can you replace all of the "thin-edge" tags with the placeholder `%%te%%`.

Support for using a placeholder was added in https://github.com/thin-edge/tedge-docs/pull/63, to provide a more consistent product naming in the docs.

with their metadata spread across multiple topics.
For e.g, for a child device `child01`, the registration message is stored on the `te/device/child01//` topic,
its twin data is stored across several `te/device/child01///twin/<twin-data-type>` topics,
its command metadata stored across several `te/device/child01///cmd/<cmd-type>` topics and so on.

On top of that, when a device has services associated with it, or has nested child devices,
they all have their own respective registration topics and other metadata topics.

> So, de-registering a device involves de-registering itself, its metadata and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So, deregistering a device involves deregistering itself, its metadata and
```

Author: Keeping `de-registering` to satisfy the typo checker even though `deregistering` also seems generally valid.

the complete entity hierarchy that is associated with it.

## Deregister a single entity

> De-registering a single entity, excluding its child entities, involves clearing its registration message and

Author: Yes, and this is something we should prevent when we provide our own APIs. But at the MQTT level, the user is free to do this and mess things up. On the next restart of the mapper, the same child devices will get auto-created, if auto-registration is ON. Else the services messages will be ignored for lacking the parent.

> De-registering a single entity, excluding its child entities, involves clearing its registration message and

Author: Removed this error-prone example of deleting a single child device and replaced it with the one that deletes the device and its services.

> De-registering a single entity, excluding its child entities, involves clearing its registration message and

Author: Keeping `de-registering` to satisfy the typo checks even though `deregistering` also seems generally valid.

all the metadata messages associated with it from the MQTT broker.
Even though thin-edge doesn't provide a direct API for this yet, this can be easily be done using third-party tools
like `mosquitto_sub` that supports clearing multiple retained messages together using the `--remove-retained` option.

> For e.g, a child device with topic id `device/child01//` can be deregistered as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, a child device with topic id `device/child01//` can be deregistered as follows:
```

```sh
mosquitto_sub --remove-retained -W 3 -t "te/device/child01///#"
```

The topic filter `te/device/child01///#` covers the device's registration message as well all of its metadata messages.
Running the same command without the `remove-retained` option shows the list of messages that would be cleared with this command.
The `-W 3` option is used to stop the command after a maximum timeout period of 3 seconds.
Adjust this timeout value based on the number of entities in your deployment.

:::note
Deregistering the main device using this mechanism is not supported.
:::

Similarly, a service with topic id `device/main/service/service01` can be deregistered as follows:

```sh

> mosquitto_sub --remove-retained -W 3 -t "te/device/main/service/service01/#"

Reviewer: I'm fairly sure we can remove the timeout option, `-W 3` and replace it with `--retained-only` (but double check this, see [docs](https://mosquitto.org/man/mosquitto_sub-1.html)).

```suggestion
mosquitto_sub --remove-retained --retained-only -t "te/device/main/service/service01/#"
```

Author: Even though the doc of `--retained-only` states that "Remove all retained messages on the server, assuming we have access to do so, **and then exit**", I don't see that happening in practice, even after explicitly sending a non-retained message. Anyway, it would only work when there is some non-retained message on the given topic filter, which isn't always guaranteed, right?

```

> Services of child devices can also be de-registered in a similar manner, using the child device topic id instead.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Services of child devices can also be deregistered in a similar manner, using the child device topic id instead.
```

:::note

> The Cumulocity mapper must be restarted for the de-registrations to take effect.

Reviewer: > The Cumulocity mapper must be restarted for the de-registrations to take effect.

Are you sure this is true? I was pretty sure that a child device could be deregistered without having to restart the mapper. But if we do need to restart the mapper, then we need to create a ticket and not require a restart.

Author: Yes. The mapper just ignores empty registration messages (clear messages). An empty message could have been interpreted as a "deregister request" resulting in the removal of that entity from the entity store, but it wasn't implemented that way due to the complexities in clearing other associated metadata messages as well from the broker. BTW, this is one of the API options that I'm considering for our "Deregistration API"

> The entities in the cloud must also be removed separately as de-registrations on the device

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The entities in the cloud must also be removed separately as deregistration on the device
```

Reviewer 2: I'm curious, `de-registering` requires `-` whilst `deregistrations` doesn't?

Author: Yeah, it's weird. When I google the following variants without the `-` seemed valid:

1. deregister
2. deregistered
3. deregistering
4. deregistration

But the spellchecker plugin in our devcontainer was specifically unhappy with `deregistering` and `deregistration` while the other two were fine. But, it looks like the spell checker in our workflow is happy with the non-hyphen versions. So, I'll just use those everywhere to be consistent.

are not propagated to the cloud.
:::

## Deregister a child device and its services

When the topic ids of the devices and services follow the default topic scheme,
which maintains the service topic ids (`te/device/<device-id>/service/<service-id>`)
directly under the device topic id (`te/device/<device-id>//`) in the hierarchy,
all the services associated to a child device can be deregistered as follows:

```sh

> mosquitto_sub --remove-retained -W 3 -t "te/device/child01/service/+/#"

Reviewer: Shouldn't the topic be:

```suggestion
mosquitto_sub --remove-retained -W 3 -t "te/device/child01/service/#"
```

This would cover all of the following topics:

```
te/device/child01/service/myservice
te/device/child01/service/myservice/m/example
te/device/child01/service/myservice/cmd/software_update
te/device/child01/service/myservice/cmd/software_update/c8y-1234
```

Author: That's not true for `#`. `te/device/child01/service/+/#` covers `te/device/child01/service/myservice` as well, in addition to `te/device/child01/service/xyz` and ``te/device/child01/service/`.

But, `te/device/child01/service/#` unnecessarily includes `te/device/child01/service` as well, which we don't want.

Reviewer: I learnt something new then. Thanks

```

The device can also be deleted along with all of its services with a minor variation in the topic
that includes the device as well, as follows:

```sh

> mosquitto_sub --remove-retained -W 3 -t "te/device/child01/+/+/#"

Reviewer: Can't the `#` wildcard pattern be used to delete the entity registration and the related telemetry/command topics?

```suggestion
mosquitto_sub --remove-retained -W 3 -t "te/device/child01/#"
```

Reviewer: Sorry, ignore this comment...I misread the number of slashes...

> mosquitto_sub --remove-retained -W 3 -t "te/device/child01/+/+/#"

Reviewer 2: I think this command is the most demanded one from users as it deletes all things related to a single child device (except the alarm topic, but it's out of the scope of this doc). So, why not moving this section in the beginning of this doc?

Author: Moved as the first command as suggested.

```

:::note
Deregistering parent and child entities together with a single command only works when
the parent and children are hierarchically linked via the topics, as in the case of services
while following the default topic scheme, which can be queried with a single topic filter.
While using custom topic schemes, that do not maintain the same topic prefix for a device and its services,
querying and deregistering them may not be a on-liner as in the previous example.
:::

## Deregister all child devices and services

> All the child devices and services can be de-registered using a wildcard topic filter that covers all the entities

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All the child devices and services can be deregistered using a wildcard topic filter that covers all the entities
```

combined with a topic exclusion filter for the main device, as follows:

```sh
mosquitto_sub -v -t te/device/# -T te/device/main/#
```
## Unsupported cases

While using the default topic scheme, the following use-cases are not supported as it's not possible to define 
wild card topic filters for the same, as the topic scheme does not capture the parent-child relationship of devices:

* Deregister all child devices of a given device
* Deregister the entire nested child device hierarchy of a device

## Custom topic schemes

Most of the commands listed above are applicable only when the default topic scheme is used.
The same rules, especially the ones involving multiple entities, do not apply to custom topic schemes,
as different entities would be linked differently based on the topic scheme that's used.
The filtering capabilities would also very from scheme to scheme.
As long as you can define topic filters to select individual entities or a set of entities,

> the same can be used for de-registering as well.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the same can be used for deregistering as well.
```

Reviewer: yeah "de-registering" does seem to be the correct usage as a verb (at least according to [the search results](https://www.google.com/search?q=de-registering&oq=de-registering&gs_lcrp=EgZjaHJvbWUyCQgAEEUYORiABDIHCAEQABiABDIHCAIQABiABDIHCAMQABiABDIHCAQQABiABDIGCAUQABgeMgYIBhAAGB4yBggHEAAYHjIGCAgQABgeMgYICRAAGB7SAQgxOTA4ajBqN6gCALACAA&sourceid=chrome&ie=UTF-8))

---
title: Deregister entities

> tags: [Deregister]

Reviewer 3: A better tag would be `Registration`. I also notice we have no tags related to chid-devices.

```suggestion
tags: [Child-Device, Registration]
```
